h2(#glossary). Glossary

*(p#glossary-1) The following definitions of terms used in this paper (in alphabetical order) represent ways of thinking about specific terminology in the context of the proposed TAME framework. These terms have many definitions in other frameworks and are tightly interwoven, and it is likely impossible to do them full justice at this point in time (or provide uncontroversial definitions that everyone will agree capture everything of importance). Moreover, much like a theorem and its component statements, the utility of these highly-related concepts is maximized by the entire set taken together, not by crisp demarcations of any one term. The below definitions are not claimed to be uniquely correct, but merely useful; this field is still sufficiently young with respect to very basic questions, which excessively sharp definitions can limit more than they enable.

h4(#glossary-agency). Agency

*(p#glossary-2) a set of properties closely related to decision-making and adaptive action which determine the degree to which optimal ways to relate to the system (in terms of communication, prediction, and control) require progressively higher-level models specified in terms of scale of goals, stresses, capabilities, and preferences of that System as an embodied Self acting in various problem spaces. This view of agency is related to those of autopoiesis (<a href="#B226">Maturana and Varela, 1980</a>) and anticipatory systems (<a href="#B313">Rosen, 1985</a>).

h4(#glossary-consciousness). Consciousness

*(p#glossary-3) the first-person phenomenal experience of any Self&#x2014;that which makes <i>my toothache</i> irreducibly different to me than anyone else&#x2019;s toothache or third-person descriptions of toothaches. The degree and content of consciousness is &#x201C;what it is like&#x201D; to be that Self, as opposed to studying it from the outside, whether or not the Self is advanced enough to be able to verbalize it or to think about it (<a href="#B254">Nagel, 1974</a>). Consciousness here is not meant to necessarily indicate advanced, reflexive, verbal self-consciousness but rather the basal sentience (sense-process-respond loop) which is taken to be a continuum. Moreover, because all cognitive agents are inevitably made of parts, we are all collective intelligences in a strong sense (<a href="#B326">Schwitzgebel, 2015</a>)&#x2014;what it is like to be you is exactly what it&#x2019;s like to be a (particularly organized) collection of cells.

h4(#glossary-cognition). Cognition

*(p#glossary-4) all of the activities undertaken by a Self, at whatever scale and of whatever material implementation, that underlie its gathering, processing, and acting on information for the purposes of adaptive action and perdurance against dissipation. Components include active inference, learning, and basal goal-directed activity, as well as complex cognitive skills such as symbolic reasoning, composition of concepts, language, and meta-cognition.

h4(#glossary-decision). Decision

*(p#glossary-5) an event during the traversal of some relevant space by a system&#x2019;s state which is efficiently modeled as a choice between diverse options. The degree of &#x201C;decision-making&#x201D; of any given system is proportional to the spatio-temporal and complexity distance between the events that eventually gave rise to a specific outcome and the outcome itself. Advanced Selves have inputs to their decision-making machinery that are counterfactual future states. The scale at which one defines appropriate inputs (stimuli) to a system is whatever scale is most efficient for understanding the resulting decisions (<a href="#B259">Noble, 2012</a>; <a href="#B275">Pezzulo and Levin, 2016</a>; <a href="#B121">Flack, 2017</a>).

h4(#glossary-mind). Mind

*(p#glossary-6) the functional, dynamic aspect of a Self that results from all of its cognitive and somatic activities, which represents the propensities for certain types of actions and possesses some degree of sentience as a first-person perspective that perdures across changes in the material components of the body.

h4(#glossary-intelligence). Intelligence

*(p#glossary-7) the functional ability to solve problems in various spaces (not necessarily in 3D space), not tied to specific implementations, anatomical structures, or time scales. The degree of intelligence (IQ) is proportional to competency in navigating these spaces, including especially the ability to identify paths that temporarily lead further from the goal state but eventually enable better results. Advanced intelligence exploits additional levels of self-modeling which enables multiple levels of virtual modeling of the Self and its outside world (counterfactual thought), anxiety, and creativity (identifying opportunities, as opposed to only solving problems existing right now). In particular, by focusing on the functional aspects of intelligence, and by recognizing that there is no intelligent agent that is not made of parts, Collective Intelligence is generalized here (emphasizing the architecture of functional connections between subunits) and is not viewed as a radically distinct natural kind.

h4(#glossary-maslow). Maslow's s Hierarchy of Needs

*(p#glossary-8) a motivational theory of psychology that focuses on the relative types of preferences and goals which human (or other) systems pursue at various stages and scales of observation (<a href="#B225">Maslow, 1943</a>). It also stresses degrees of integration and the modulation of higher levels by the level of stress in subunits.

h4(#glossary-self). Self

*(p#glossary-9) a coherent system emerging within a set of integrated parts that serves as the functional owner of associations, memories, and preferences, and acts to accomplish goals in specific problem spaces where those goals belong to the collective and not to any individual sub-component. Selves are defined by the spatio-temporal scale and nature of the types of goals they can pursue&#x2014;their &#x201C;cognitive light cone.&#x201D; They have functional boundaries and material implementations but are not identical with any specific type of substrate, and can overlap within other Selves at the same, higher, and lower-level Selves. A Self is a theoretical construct posited by external systems (such as scientists, engineers, and conspecifics) and by systems themselves (<i>via</i> internal self-models), which facilitates prediction and adaptive behavior by serving as an efficient, high-level target for intervention and control strategies.

h4(#glossary-stress). Stress

*(p#glossary-10) a system-level state which serves as a driver for homeostatic loops (operating over a variable that is progressively reduced as activity gets the system closer to its desired region of action space). The spatio-temporal and complexity scale of events that can possibly stress a system are a good indicator of that system&#x2019;s cognitive sophistication. Stress can arise <i>via</i> discord between external states and the Self&#x2019;s needs, between sensory stimuli and expectations, or between the goals of multiple subsystems within an agent, either within or across levels of organization. Thus, geometric frustration (<a href="#B317">Sadoc and Mosseri, 2007</a>) and material scientists; notions of stress as a high-level determinant of system behavior over time (<a href="#B28">Batterman and Rice, 2014</a>; <a href="#B27">Batterman, 2015</a>) are minimal examples of the fundamental concept of Stress, on the same continuum as metabolic stress in bacteria, competing cellular alignment forces in planar polarity of tissues, and &#x201C;true psychological stress&#x201D; in organisms.
